# CS-340-Client-Server-Development
CS-340 Client-Server Development Final Project

## Project Overview
CS-340, Rescue Animal Database Project
This project takes an existing database of animal data and provides access to that database by developing both a CRUD module (Create/Read/Update/Delete) and a separate dashboard module to provide a website dashboard that displays the data in a grid. The goal is an interface that allows easy access to search for animals with certain criteria that make them eligible for training as rescue animals.
The project primarily displays database entries with various filtering options to narrow the data down to useful lists that meet rescue dog requirements. While the database interface does support adding new entries and updating values, the dashboard currently does not include implementations to allow this.


## 8-2 Journal: Portfolio Item
•	How do you write programs that are maintainable, readable, and adaptable? Especially consider your work on the CRUD Python module from Project One, which you used to connect the dashboard widgets to the database in Project Two. What were the advantages of working in this way? How else could you use this CRUD Python module in the future?

One of the key methods of creating maintainable, readable, and adaptable code is designing for a separation of concerns. In this project, the database interface CRUD module was completely separate from the dashboard module. Developed as independent modules that interfaced in clearly defined ways, these modules can be replaced with minimal effort. For example, any other dashboard can use the CRUD module, or the dashboard can easily be connected to a different database using a new CRUD module.

Since the CRUD module relies only on the type of database (MongoDB), and not the database structure, this same module can be reused for other databases. Connection information, authentication data, and queries are all passed into the CRUD module instead of being hard coded, making the module flexible. 
Modularity also improves testability, which enables easier maintenance. By only needing to test and verify smaller sections, functionality can be confirmed more easily, and changes in one module remain isolated from others.

•	How do you approach a problem as a computer scientist? Consider how you approached the database or dashboard requirements that Grazioso Salvare requested. How did your approach to this project differ from previous assignments in other courses? What techniques or strategies would you use in the future to create databases to meet other client requests?

Generally, software projects either start from scratch or extend existing code. In my professional experience, I have encountered more projects that extend existing code than create code from scratch. While both types of projects are common, it is an important skill for a developer to be able to read and understand existing code in order to further develop new features for it.
Unlike many earlier assignments where I developed all components from scratch, in this project we were presented with limited pre-built code, and required to extend the functionality. Building a design document detailing requirements is one of the first major steps in any project; when provided with existing code, one of the early steps is to read and test that code to determine what that code does, so that the requirements for extending that functionality are clear. 
Typically a style guide is selected as part of the design. For preexisting code, the style the code is written in determines the style guide for the project, if none were provided - as was the case for this project. Maintaining the same style creates a cohesive code base that is easier to understand and maintain.
For future database projects I would continue to use the design- and documentation-first approach. By determining the initial requirements, the design becomes clear, and by documenting those designs and design decisions, it is possible to compare them to the initial requirements, and to validate that the project meets them. I have learned in my professional career that moving ahead with a project before designs are complete and requirements are known often entails revisions and rewrites that usually cost more time and effort than was saved in starting early.


•	What do computer scientists do, and why does it matter? How would your work on this type of project help a company, like Grazioso Salvare, to do their work better?
Computer scientists cover a range of professions, including database engineers, IT staff, developers and project managers. In many cases a single individual will take on multiple roles throughout a project, all focused on moving the project toward successful conclusion. Computer scientists apply their knowledge and expertise to the project, providing specialized knowledge that maybe be unavailable otherwise.
As a computer scientist, developer and project administrator, work on this project was intended to assist companies like Grazioso Salvare by providing simple access to aggregated data. The initial task was to create a dashboard to the client's specification to provide an example proof of concept that could be built out into a full database access system. After the initial deployment, learning how the company uses the interface and what specific challenges they have would shape the next development step. Thus, improvements can be made incrementally to meet additional needs that will improve the company’s process flow, and potentially provide access to new or better information that enable improved decision-making. Ultimately, by improving access to the data, the company can operate more efficiently, finding rescue-trainable animals faster, and potentially save more human lives.
